In this lecture, you'll learn about connected local and static routes for IPv6. IPv6 routing works
pretty much exactly the same way as it does for IPv4. But IPv4 routing and IPv6 routing
are separate processes.
And they each have their own separate routing table.
So if a router receives an IPv4 packet, meaning it's got an IPv4 address as the destination, it
will route it according to its IPv4 routing table.
And if that same router receives on IPv6 packet, it will get routed according to its IPv6 routing table.
Now, obviously for a router to be able to route IPv6 traffic, it needs to have IPv6 enabled.
So it needs to have IPv6 unicast routing, it needs to have its own IPv6 addresses and it needs
to have the IPv6 wrote in its routing table.
The IPv4 and IPv6 routing tables are built in exactly the same way through static routes or via dynamic
routing protocols like RIP, EIGRP and OSPF. All of those dynamic routing protocols support both IPv4
and IPv6 as well.
IPv4 routing is enabled by default on a Cisco IOS router but IPv6 routing is not so you have to
turn it on.
The way that you do turn on is with the command IPv6 unicast routing.
Now, if you forget to put that command on there, you can still configure IPv6 addresses on the routers
interfaces and it will be able to communicate with hosts that are on those same subnets.
But if a host tries to send IPv6 traffic through the router, the router won't forward it.
So this can be confusing because the host will be able to ping the router. The router might be able to ping whatsoever on
the other side.
But if you don't have IPv6 unicast routing enabled, the router is not going to forward the traffic.
So whenever you're configuring IPv6 and a router, that should be the first command that you put in.
The connected and local routes, just like everything else, worked the same way in IPv6 as we do
in IPv4. So you see in the example configuration here, we've got a dual stock, meaning that it's running
IPv4 and IPv6 at the same time.
You don't need to do that if you're running IPv6.
So you could have a router with IPv4 only, or you could have a router with IPv6 only, or you can
have a router running both IPv4 and IPv6.
When you do that,
it's called a dual stack
router.
So the way we can do that is like you see in the example here on interface fa0/0,
we've configured an IPv4 address, that's IP address 10.10.1.1 and we've also configured
an IPv6 address on that interface 2001:DB8:0:1::1, which is the standard /64.
And we've also configured an IPv4 and an IPv6 address on fa2/0.
As usual, when we are configuring IPv4, the command starts with just IP like IP address.
When we're configuring IPv6, it starts with IPv6 like IPv6 address.
So we've got those IP addresses configured on the interfaces. When you do that, it will automatically
enter a connected and a local route for those interfaces into the routing table.
So what I'm going to do in this section is I will look at IPv4 first as a refresher and then we'll compare
that with how things will look with IPv6.
So we've configured our interfaces with IPv4 and IPv6.
We then do a show ip route and that will show us the IPv4 routing table.
And you can see we've got entries that match the interfaces
we just configured. Our connected route for 10.10.0.0/24 out interface fa2/0,
and a connected route for 10.10.1.0/24 out interface fa0/0. From IOS 15,
the router will also add local routes as well.
Local routes always have a /32 mask. So I can see
10.10.0.1/32 on fa0/0.
The reason we can see both connected and local routes, reason that this was added is allows us to see the
full configuration on the interface from a show ip route command.
I can see the connected route is
10.10.0.0/24.
And the matching local route is 10.10.0.1/32.
So I know that the IP address in the interface is 10.10.0.1/24. OK, so that was for IPv4. The same example to see
the IPv6 routing table, is of course,
show ipv6 route.
And we'll have similar entries in here as well.
So I've got my two connected routes which match the IPv6 addresses that I've added and my two local routes
as well.
IPv6 users are 128-bit address, so the local routes will show up as /128.
So I've got my connected route for 2001:DB8::/64 on fa2/0 and my
other connected route 2001:DB8:0:1::/64 is
on fa0/0 and I can see my /128 local routes there as well.
If a router receives traffic for a network which is not directly attached to, it needs to know how to get there
in order to forward to traffic.
So like you just saw, whenever we configured an IP address on the interface, the router is directly attached
to those networks and those rights will be automatically added into the routing table.
But if it wants to get to a network that is not directly attached to it needs to know how to get there.
So as an administrator, you can manually do that by adding a static route to that destination or the router
can learn it via a routing protocol like RIP, OSPF, EIGRP, BGP and ISIS.
So let's have a look at an example of adding static routes.
I've got R2 on the left, which is connected to the 10.1.0.0/24 and a 10.0.0.0/24
networks so it doesn't need routes added for them.
But the 10.0.1.0/24 and 10.0.2.0/24 networks are behind
R1.
So R2 is going to need to have routes added to get to those networks behind R1.
Similarly, R1 will need to have a route added to get to the 10.1.0.0/24 network, which
is behind R2.
So I add routes on R1. I've got ip route 10.1.0.0 255.255.255.0 for the subnet
mask.
And the next hop address is 10.0.0.2, which is the interface that is on R2, that R1 can reach
directly.
Then from my routes going back in the other direction, I'm going to have ip routes for 10.0.1.0
and 10.0.2.0, both with a 24-bit mask. On R2 where the next hop is R1, at 10.0.0.1.
So you knew that already.
That's how we do it in IPv4. For IPv6,
obviously it's going to be very similar. So here on R1,
we need to add a route to the 2001:DB8:0:0 network, which is behind R2. So in IPv4,
it's ip route.
In IPv6,
we say IPv6
route.
So we've got ipv6 route
2001:DB8.
And I don't need to put in the 0 and 0 because remember, for when we've got a contiguous bank
of zeros, we can just say :: there.
So we say 2001:DB8::, meaning that all the rest of the fields are a 0/64
and then the next hop address is R2 at 2001:DB8:0:1::2.
So that's the route on R1 to get to the network behind R2.
I'm also going to need a couple of routes on R2 to get to the networks behind R1.
So I say ipv6 route on R2, 2001:DB8:0:2 and another route for 2001:DB8:0:3 /64.
And the next hop address is R1 at 2001:DB8:0:1::1.
OK, so that's how we add our static routes, just like with IPv4. We can also do summary and default
routes in IPv6 as well. Looking at how we do it in IPv4 first.
So the routes here are on R1.
I've got a summary route here up at the top.
So you see the networks beginning with 10.1.
I've got 10.1.1.0 is between R4 and R3. And 10.1.0.0 is between R3 and R2.
R1 is not directly connected to those networks.
So it's going to need a route to get there.
I could do that by adding two separate routes.
I could have a route for 10.1.0.0/24 and another route for 10.1.1.0/24.
But I can summarize that to 10.1.0.0/16 and then that will encompass both networks.
So I can do it by just adding one route rather than adding multiple routes.
So my command there is ip route 10.1.0.0 255.255.0.0
and the next hop address is on R2 at 10.0.0.2.
I also need a normal route for ip route 10.1.3.0 which is between R4 and R5. I use a 24-bit mask here.
255.255.255.0 and the next hop address is R5 at 10.0.3.2
Then we'll see that R1 is also connected out to the Internet.
So I want a default route for all traffic that's not on the inside, that is going to go out to the Internet.
The command for that is ip route
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0,
means it's a default static
route.
And the next hop address in this example is 203.0.113.2.
That is the router out to our service provider.
So that's how we do it in IPv4. A similar scenario for IPv6.
So here I'm going to do my summary route first.
So you see all the networks beginning with 2001:DB8:0 are available along the top half
through R2.
So that will cover my network between R3 and R4, and my network between R2 and R3.
Rather than adding separate /64 routes for 2001:DB8:0:1 and 2001:DB8:0:2, I can add a
/48 route for everything beginning with 2001:DB8:0.
So I say ipv6 route 2001:DB8:0::48.
So that's going to cover everything beginning with 2001:DB8:0 and the next hop address is
2001:DB8:0::2 which is on R2.
I also need a route for the network between R4 and R5.
So I say ipv6 route 2001:DB8:1:1::/64.
So this is not a summary route.
The next hop address is R5 at 2001:DB8:1::2.
And I'm also going to add a default static route here as well.
So do that in IPv6,
it's ipv6
route ::/0.
That's the equivalent of 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0
in IPv4. And the next hop address is at my service provider.
That's
2001:DB8:3::2.
OK, so that was our connected routes, our local routes, static routes, summary routes and the default static route
for IPv6.
Next up, we're going to take a look at how to actually configure this with a lab example.